(grinding electric guitar)
- What did you think
when you saw him coming up with it?
- Oh, well he was telling us
that it wasn't loaded, so that was okay.
- I think he says it
is, is the gun loaded?
- [Woman] No, he said it wa--
- No, my gun's got ammo in it.
We carry it like the police carry it.
- But you're not the police.
- [Woman] But you're not, yeah.
- Well, that's just it, there's really
no distinction between the police
and the citizenship other than their
general training and permits to do so.
- [Jordan] Training, though, is one thing.
Why keep it loaded right now?
- Because if somebody,
an Islamic terrorist,
whatnot, crazy guy--
- [Jordan] Islamic terrorist?
What's your expectation?
Do you fear that's gonna happen right now?
- No.
- Just cause you're walking around
with a gun on your side
don't make me safe.
It just doesn't look right, in society.
- And to be fair, you're passing this out
because you want more rights because
you feel you're not--
- [Man With Gun] I want a
greater restoration of rights.
- So you don't have enough?
You're walking around a parade route
like John Wick and you
feel like, "I want more."
- That is me, Jordan Klepper, at a parade
in Gonzalez, Texas.
I am facilitating a conversation
between a concerned parade-goer
and an open carry gun rights activist.
They were carrying their
guns, out in the open,
they were big guns, and
they were advocating
for the idea of constitutional carry.
And across the state
in Dallas was my friend
Kobi Libii, and he was with a group
called Guerrilla Mainframe,
and they are a group
of black activists who
are drawing attention
to the cause of police violence
towards the African-American community.
We decided to go out on this day
to see how people reacted to both
of these groups, to see if race
played into this at all.
Spoiler alert, it does.
It's a really interesting episode for us,
and I'm inviting my friend Kobi Libii
on to talk about it.
We both had different experiences
but we were making one show, and we saw
some of these things from
different perspectives,
it wasn't always easy.
One state, two protests and a conversation
around guns and racism in America.
This is Klepper.
(lighthearted guitar music)
- I'm always to get
rid of the shock factor
of seeing a gun.
I think people have been conditioned
"Oh gosh, there's a guy with a gun,
"I'm gonna call 911."
- That's a good condition.
- Well, is it?
When I see somebody going to church
I don't call the police
to say "Hey, they're
"exercising their First Amendment rights."
- Yeah, well, people aren't getting killed
with churches all around the country.
- Some people are getting
killed in churches.
- Yeah, with guns!
C.J. is the founder of Open Carry Texas,
a group that wants to normalize
the sight of people
carrying guns into Chipotle
and loosen Texas gun laws.
They've been effective, in 2016 OCT
successfully lobbied the state
to legalized licensed
open carry of handguns.
- [C.J.] Are we done?
- [All] No!
- [Jordan] And today C.J. and 30
of his OCT buddies are headed to a parade
in Gonzalez, Texas to spread the word.
Because this is Texas,
where the state bird
is a revolver, OCT isn't even the only
activist group open carrying today.
250 miles north a second,
totally unrelated group
is using guns to draw
attention to their cause.
My friend Kobi Libii
is embedding with them.
- So I know I'm meeting this group
called Guerrilla Mainframe, I know that
they're a group of black activists
and that they open carry to protest
police brutality, and I
know that we're in the South
which has never had a problem
with black guys with guns.
- I think you're gonna be totally fine,
I wouldn't worry at all.
- Okay, you have the confidence
that only a white man
with security can have.
(metal rubbing)
- So I am here with Mr. Kobi Libii,
who is both performer
and writer on Klepper.
What is Guerrilla Mainframe?
- So Guerrilla Mainframe is a group
of black activists based it Texas,
and they do a bunch of things,
they do a bunch of community programs,
in their sort of working
class black community
in Dallas, but the thing
their most known for
are these sort of brash, confrontational,
militant open carry protests
against police brutality.
So, if you don't know
what some of those phrases
mean, they take big, conspicuous guns
out in public and protest
the unjust killing
of black people by police.
And so, there's sort of a
militant aesthetic to it,
so it's a lot of, picture
the Black Panthers,
picture military fatigues and black gloves
and, you know, sort of
loud, very sort of direct
(electric guitar music)
confrontational chanting, that's
sort of their style of protest.
- Whose streets?
- [Group] Our streets!
- I think this might be them.
(military drum march)
Okay, you got a second now?
- Yeah, yeah, this is time
- All right, awesome.
Those aren't loaded, right?
- Huh?
- Those aren't loaded.
- No, they are loaded.
- Oh, okay, yeah.
- Yes, they're loaded, rocked and ready.
- Great.
(cymbal roll)
- What, specifically, were
they protesting that day?
- So, specifically they were protesting
the death of a gentleman named Botham Jean
who was shot to death in his own home
by an off-duty police officer.
So, a woman named Amber Guyger
is an off-duty police officer,
lived in the same building as Botham Jean
and went into Botham Jean's apartment,
and her story is that she believed
it was her own apartment.
She walked into Botham Jean's apartment,
saw a man there, that she believed
to be a burglar, and
shot him with her weapon,
and he died.
- It's an absolutely insane story.
- It's an insane story, yes.
So she's white and an
off-duty police officer,
he's a black man in
line with a lot of other
unjust killings of unarmed black people,
this was a particularly
egregious one because
a dude's just sitting on
his own couch, you know.
So this was protest about her prosecution
and what she was charged with,
and what she wasn't charged with,
and more broadly raising awareness
about that killing and
this sort of epidemic
(grinding electric guitar)
of unjust killings of people
of color by the police.
(cymbal roll)
- The reason Rakim, who's the leader
of Guerrilla Mainframe
ended up in, as a figure
in the national news at all was because
he was detained for a number of months
as a result of him being investigated
under what's called the
Black Identity Extremist
designation, which is a very shadowy,
new designation that the FBI created
to monitor quote-unquote
"Black Identity Extremists"
which is a nebulously defined, possibly
nonexistent thing that gives the FBI
a mandate to follow black activists
that they are concerned
about for whatever reason.
And that's distressing to a lot of people
that care about, you know, civil rights,
because of COINTELPRO,
there's a long history
of the FBI doing very troubling monitoring
of black activists.
You know, the FBI famously monitored
Martin Luther King, allegedly sent him
and a number of other activists
letters trying to get
them to stop their work,
encouraging them to kill themselves,
you know, there's a very troubling history
of law enforcement, and
the FBI specifically
monitoring black activists and trying
to make bad things happen
to black activists.
Right, so that's the sort
of historical backdrop
of this.
And then in 2017 we see
Black Identity Extremist
program pop the scene, we can't really
get much context on it, there's no,
for example there's no equivalent
White Identity Extremist program to cover
the white supremacists, and, you know,
the antisemitic violence,
there's no equivalent
program to look at that kind of extremism
but, for some reason
Black Identity Extremism
is something that the FBI believes,
or certain parties at the FBI believe
needs to be monitored in this extreme way.
Anyway, that's the
backdrop of this and Rakim
is believed to be the first person
who's been detained under this
Black Identity Extremist designation,
and particularly why he
was on the FBI's radar
is he's made a number
of very inflammatory,
very offensive remarks
about law enforcement
and the death of law enforcement officers
on Facebook and on Twitter,
and it's explicitly said
in his trial that the reason he ended up
on law enforcement's radar
is because of these things.
Specifically, an FBI,
and this isn't a bit,
the FBI officer that first flagged him
found out about him from Alex Jones.
So the FBI officer watches InfoWars
and saw InfoWars covering not even
Rakim's group, but another group
of black activists marching around.
And you can imagine the InfoWars
coverage of this, right.
- I, uh, we watched a lot of that.
- We spend a lot of time with
that fine gentleman, right,
but so that's the sort
of level of thinking
that is going into this, at least
that's the criticism of it, right.
So anyway this guy ends up in jail,
Rakim ends up in jail for five months,
held without, denied parole, effectively,
ultimately the charges are dismisses,
the judge is effectively like,
"This is nonsense, you can't jail a person
"because of things they said on Facebook."
And he was set free,
but the coverage of that
obviously caused a lot of consternation
you know, across
everybody that cares about civil rights.
So that's the background of this.
Anyway, we were interested in that group,
that particular treatment under
the Black Identity Extremist
designation, what their deal is generally,
their relationship to gun rights,
because a black militant group like this
has a different relationship to gun rights
than a lot of other progressive groups.
The difficulty about
trying to tell the story
of Rakim and Guerrilla Mainframe quickly
is, ultimately, a difficulty
I think we ran into
on this show, which is
that some of the statements
that Rakim and Guerrilla
Mainframe have made
are so inflammatory that there is gonna be
a certain segment of the population
that just shuts down in response to them.
And one of my concerns
about trying to do that
was trying to unpack that sort of
with the detail and care that it deserves
to be unpacked and, to my sensibility,
to get people through
the discomfort with that.
And to be clear, with
this kind of militant
rhetoric that discomfort
is part of the point.
- The headlines with Rakim,
rightfully so or not,
focused on the rhetoric
that was there to get
attention, that talked
about killing police
in a flippant manner, "laugh my ass off"
or "LMAO" I remember was one of the things
that stood out there.
And so I recall at the
beginning part of it
it was like "Oh, it's tough."
As we're choosing things to put
on television, is this
the kind of thing, are we
signal boosting a group
that is more problematic
than it is helpful?
I remember that being part of the early
discussions we had there.
And I think, like, as this story evolved
we did find this day when they were
having the protest.
The detail that seemed
unique, and a fun way in
was, on that same day they
were having that protest
another group was having
a protest, also in Texas,
also using an open carry protest.
Specifically, their protest
was to bring attention
to open carrying, and more specifically
constitutional carry, and that group
was Open Carry Texas, a
group run by C.J. Grisham.
They are there to normalize the idea of
brandishing a weapon in Texas.
They had some success a couple years ago,
Texas is an open carry
state, and it's part of
the efforts they had taken to make it
an open carry state.
What they are pushing
for, they are consistently
pro Second Amendment, pro gun rights,
and there's smaller laws
that they are consistently,
C.J. is often at the State Building
attempting to push forward on that,
but what they were doing there
was a thing called constitutional carry,
which essentially is the rights,
the Constitution gives
you the right have a gun
and to carry a gun and they don't want
those extra steps to open carry.
Once you get a gun you
should be able to open carry,
was essentially what they
were out in Gonzalez, Texas,
with their guns, trying
to get people to feel
comfortable with guns and to support
the idea of constitutional carry.
- And just to go back to the sort of
origination phase of
this, one of the reasons
that Lucy was so excited about
Open Carry Texas specifically was because
Open Carry Texas is quite extreme, too,
in a lot of ways.
And one of the ways
they're extreme is that
their leader C.J. Grisham
has also made a lot of
inflammatory, violent statements
about police the kind of
slightly different context
more about, you know,
the Bundys, basically,
you know, cops coming for, you know,
"If anyone messes with my
cattle rights, I'll kill 'em."
kind of thing.
I'm not, that's not a direct
quote I just, you know--
- That's just your own personal beliefs.
- Exactly, yeah.
- Big cattle rights guy.
- If grazing rights aren't a thing--
- Kobi, we don't have time.
- I'm sorry, it's a soapbox,
it's a soapbox.
- You and your grazing rights soapbox.
- But it is true.
What we started to find, so
C.J. is a controversial figure,
(grinding electric guitar)
he has been arrested multiple times,
he is often an aggressor.
In 2018, C.J and OCT had a standoff
with police in Olmos Park, Texas
- [C.J] So you got an AR-15 because
a man is lawfully carrying.
- Get on the ground.
- [C.J] No, we're not
getting on the ground.
- Get on the ground.
- [C.J] We're not getting on the ground.
- Get on the ground, I'm
not gonna tell you again.
- [C.J] I'm not doing
anything against the la--
- Get on the ground!
(C.J. cries out)
- [Officer] Hey, get back!
- This event was remarkable because
no one got killed, and because in response
to C.J.'s provocation Olmos Park
repealed their gun ordinance.
- That was a tense situation, they ask you
to get down, you didn't get down.
What do you think would have happened
if you were black and
that situation arose?
- It happens to white people, it happens
to black people.
When it happens to a black person
they get a lot of
credit, they get a lot of
attention for it, but when it happens
to a white guy we don't get the same
kind of attention. It's
not a black or white thing
- I don't think black
people are getting credit
for dying at the hands of police.
That's not exactly a credit
they're tying to put on their IMDb page.
- No, I don't think it is,
I'm trying-- (cymbal roll)
- And as you look into it, he has said
some very similar things aimed at cops
online, on Facebook.
- And hasn't been
persecuted in the same way
for those statements, hasn't been jailed
for those statements, and, you know,
one of the ambitions with this episode is
you're trying to show different
treatment under the law
and you're trying to
show, what essentially is,
you're trying to pin down unconscious bias
and the way it attacks,
it turns into actual
violence in communities and actual
violations of civil rights.
It's sometimes hard to
prove, and sometimes
hard to see real concrete evidence of,
and one of the things we
liked about this contrast
was, and that we thought we could do
in this format that we can't necessarily
do at The Opposition was, in showing
someone who has also made violent
anti-police statements but not faced
some of the same
ramification, it's easier,
theoretically at least,
it gives some context
for people that are shut down
by the violent rhetoric as such.
It gives some context to them for why
even if you find that rhetoric offensive,
even if you find that
rhetoric a nonstarter,
the treatment of, you
know, Rakim specifically
around this rhetoric is a
broader civil rights problem
that we should all be concerned about
and emblematic of the
various disproportionate
treatments under the law, of which
killing unarmed people is
just one horrific example.
- And I think one of the first things
we wanted to do with this,
just because of this day,
it gave us a focal point to like,
"Let's go and see what,
experientially, can happen."
What were your expectations going down
to Dallas to essentially
an open carry protest?
- Um yeah, well I--
- You're not a big guns guy.
- I'm not a big guns guy,
so there's some jokes
early in the episode, and
when I'm at the gun range.
(grinding electric guitar)
I shoot a gun for the
first time in this episode,
so you should probably
watch it, if you haven't.
Hello, hello.
So this is my first time.
- Just relax, be comfortable,
you'll be good to go, man.
- Would you like to...
(gunshots drowning out dialogue)
- I can't hear.
- Just come on.
- Okay.
- [Rakim] So, now, do
a slow, steady squeeze,
and breathe out as you're
coming towards the end.
(gun fires)
- Goddamn
(gun firing)
- It feels like I fucking
summoned lightning.
(laughing)
- Yes!
- Something that's wild about it
is just the physical thing you do,
which is just this little
finger pull, you know,
that's what you call it,
right is finger pull?
That's the technical term?
- Finger pull, yeah.
You're a real pro.
What do you do?
That finger pull.
- I'm good at body stuff,
I'm an athlete, you know.
Yeah, cool, cool, cool.
- Yeah, no Clint Eastwood
often talks about,
like, the finger pull.
- Yeah, totally, exactly.
- Yeah, I remember those classic moments,
those classic finger pull lines.
- Yeah, I think my career from here
is going to be as an action star,
we don't need to get into it.
- I don't think you will.
(both laughing)
- But the reaction you get from the weapon
is so wildly disproportionate
to the thing you do,
that it's a very surreal experience
in that way, I found.
- Yeah, actually I think
that's a really nice way
of putting it.
I think for a lot of people
that is the draw, right?
That you have that access to that power,
and for a lot of people
that is also the giant fear,
I'm like, by no means
should I have whatever
you can do to have that kind of power,
because whether or not yourself with
that amount of power.
- And I think that the symbolism of that
is not lost on me in the
context of this episode
because I think what
you have is two groups
very much interested in the personal power
and the empowerment and the masculinity,
you know, traditionally
defined, that comes from
wielding that, from physically having that
and from being seen having that,
and for Guerrilla Mainframe I think
it's a powerful antidote
to the lack of agency
that they're experiencing
in their community.
If you can be in your own home
and a police officer can walk in
and just shoot you to
death while you're sitting
in your own house, you know, if that's
the level of agency
you have, having a tool
or a symbol that is the opposite
of that powerlessness, there's a seduction
to that that I understand,
that fills a hole
that I think it's
reasonable to want filled.
And then I think with a lot of sort of
run-of-the-mill gun rights guys
it's about, it's a little more cosplay,
like you have a great joke in the episode
where you call one of the guys John Wick,
and I think that's what
it is, it's a fantasy
about a kind of masculine prowess
that maybe they don't
feel in other respects
in their life or that
is satisfying to imagine
being the hero, the protector, the savior.
- For sure.
- And it's like, but
the difference between
wanting that kind of power because
it sort of feels good and scratches
an itch in you broken masculinity
is very different than
wanting that kind of power
because you're afraid for your life
and feel powerlessness.
- Well said.
Definitely the experience I had
when I was out in Gonzalez
with the open carry group,
there was probably about 30 or so people
who were open carrying
(grinding electric guitar)
of all ages, even down to, I believe,
a 13-year-old, who was open carrying.
What are you carrying?
- I don't know the specific number,
I know it's an AR, I
believe it's an AR-15.
- It's an AR-15.
Do you like open carrying?
- Uh, yes.
- Why is that?
- It's just, like, if we don't have
any open carry, if we
don't get to have our guns
then what happens is
that there's gonna be,
just gonna be chaos, like we're not going
to be able to protect ourselves.
- How much practice do
you have on that thing?
- I don't have practice right now,
I'm just open carrying it.
I feel responsible for protecting others
because I'm the one that could
provide protection with the gun.
- That's a lot of responsibility
for you, you're 13.
- Yeah.
- Is that good for you guys?
A 13-year- old carrying an AR-15?
- He's probably a better shot than I am.
Well, that's not true, not many people
are better shot's than I am.
(cymbal roll)
- I think for me the issue that I always
get caught up on is like, there's the idea
that I have a gun, this is my right
to bring it in.
They rarely take into effect how the gun
does change speech in that situation.
You're injecting a potential
threat into a situation
and you're limiting other people's ability
to be free because
you've injected the idea
of violence, and you call it protection,
and if you're not lucky enough to be
one of the people who feels safe
in that environment, that
person has the upper hand.
I feel like that's
often not reckoned with.
At the same time, I will give, like,
the arguments that feel
most compelling to me
with Open Carry Texas, I
do think are essentially
libertarian arguments,
and a lot of that is, like
what the Second Amendment means
and I have these rights,
they feel very anti-government,
"You shouldn't be able to take
anything away from me."
And I think we've talked
a lot about this here.
I think open carry, I think they
are able to reckon with what I deserve
but they have a hard time
reckoning, sometimes,
with how that affects culture, but to them
that doesn't matter.
Initially, I thought this
piece was going to be,
we're going to see what
happens at two open carry,
I think I was probably overly simplistic
in my assumption going in.
I was like "Oh, two open carry groups,
"in Texas, that feels like that's a
"Texas day, that's a Texas
a day as you're gonna get.
"We're gonna go, I'm gonna go off on one,
"Kobi can go off on one.
"We can kind of tell
this stor to see, like,
"what is the reaction to these groups?"
- And to be clear, they were happening
at literally the same time.
- Yes.
- It was like the same
morning at the same time.
There's a shot in the
episode of us FaceTiming
with each other, which
is, we didn't cheat,
that's real, that happened, right?
- Yeah, I think, like, it felt like
a social experiment. I think
also at that point in the show
it was like, "Let's go without
"a whole lot of expectation
what we're getting back."
- And, I was just, and I
think one of the things
we were very curious
about was just to watch
the experience of a bunch of black guys
walking around with guns and a bunch
of white guys walking around with guns,
and just see how they're treated
and see what the temperature feels like,
you know, in the room, as it were,
walking around with those groups.
We really wanted to see what it was like
for those two groups, you know,
a black group and a white group
walking around with guns,
and when we say guns
we mean guns, right?
- They're big guns.
(Kobi laughing)
There were some guns on the hip
but it was mostly giant,
giant military-style
weapons.
- Yeah, these are long guns, there's no
missing these guns, you
know, and it's a gaggle
of these people, which is what you call
that's a technical term for
a group of men with guns.
- It's a gaggle of guns.
- Yes, yes. (laughs)
- But it's, you know,
with Guerrilla Mainframe
they're marching in
formation, it's, you know
20 or 30 folks walking around with
weapons, you know, and Open Carry Texas
probably a little smaller than that.
15, 10, 15, 20 guys?
- I would say 15
- [Kobi] 15 guys, yeah.
- Yeah, it fluctuated, and I think
they also had big guns,
I think their purpose there was
this normalization and
so, they had those guns,
they wanted to be seen with those guns.
They had guns and
flyers, and C.J. Grisham,
who is the leader, C.J. is very congenial.
Or genial. Congenial?
Genial.
- I think congenial is like a disease.
- Oh. Is he--
- Or no, that's congenital.
Congenital is a disease.
- He's genital.
Is he genital?
(Jordan laughing)
C.J.'s genital, let's go with that.
- You, this is my genital
friend over here. (laughs)
But his goal was to be
a friendly as possible,
and so he's handing out flyers with a
big old gun on his back, saying like,
"Oh, hi ma'am, hi ma'am, we're here
"to talk about constitutional carry,
"take this flyer."
Like, to be a presence,
but to almost blend into
the background, which was
very different than the
way in which Guerrilla
Mainframe was hoping to
affect the group.
- Yeah, so it's really
interesting, with almost everything
you talk about with Guerrilla Mainframe
you have to talk about
different audiences,
because there is sort of one audience,
which is the black
community they come from
which is the working class community,
working class, predominantly
black community,
faces this kind of police
violence regularly,
has a number of other
very legitimate complaints
about the way structural racism
has impacted their
community, and so you have to
talk about that audience,
and then separately
you have to talk about what I would call
the white mainstream audience,
which has a different reaction
to some of these signifiers.
So Guerrilla Mainframe's posture, is,
I would say, confrontational, right?
But the question is, what
are they confronting?
And what they are confronting is
a paradigm that lets black people
get killed in their own homes, right?
And even though that
posture is confrontational
to something, different
audiences read that differently.
So when we were walking through that
working class black community,
it doesn't feel confrontational.
It feels actually quite
warm and friendly and known,
and so we'd get Black Power signs,
so that kind of confrontation, even though
the posture is an antagonistic posture,
it's a confrontational posture,
how that's received by the audience
is as empowering and as nourishing
because the experience is like,
"Oh, thank God, someone is expressing
"how we feel in the
face of this violence."
And I have to say, for me personally,
I was surprised, I expected
to be mostly afraid,
because of police
retribution, my fear was,
I'm afraid to be a black
person walking around
in general, you know, because of
this kind of police
violence, I'm certainly
afraid to do it when we're
black guys with guns.
Like, if my cell phone can be perceived
as a gun and I can be shot to death,
like, if I'm around actual guns, that's
legitimately frightening to me.
So I was legitimately afraid walking in,
and what I was surprised
by in the working class
black community was how nourishing it felt
to have this posture of confronting
the system that makes me feel afraid
walking around like that all the time.
Right, and I think that's what that
community responded to, and, you know
you can say what you want
about the effectiveness
of that protest, you can say what you want
about the positivity of guns being out
in public at all, but it was
absolutely striking to me
how personally, and also
in the community, that posture felt like
a deeply nourishing counterpoint to
the sort of pressure and persecution
that that community and I
personally feel all the time.
So that's sort of one audience, right?
And then functionally what happens is
we started in this working
class black community
and then crossed over and
were at the UT-Oklahoma
football game, which is a lot of uh,
(Jordan laughing)
you know, you know, like a Saturday.
- Yeah.
It's, how do we get this,
how do we make it more Texas?
- Yeah, so it's a bunch
of, you know, I was about
to call them good ol'
boys, is that offensive?
Is that like a slur against the South?
- It's offensive to my people,
I come from a long like of good ol' boys.
- Yeah, so forgive me, I
apologize to the South,
broadly speaking.
(Jordan laughing)
But it's, you know it's the--
- They knew where they were walking into.
- Yeah, it's frat boys, right?
- Yeah
- One of the things that's incredibly
hard to capture on camera,
and I think is also
difficult to communicate
to people who don't have this experience
in one axis of their life or other,
but the discomfort stepping outside
of your place, is that when you are
being uppity, like
there's a particular way
you get regarded as a black person
when your uppity, right?
Which is that if I walk into a place
that's too expensive, or if I walk into
a particularly white
place, there is a tension
that comes into the air,
of the way I'm regarded
until I can offer a couple of signifiers
that say "Oh no no, don't worry,
"I'm not, like a black
guy who wandered in here,
"I'm like, a middle class black guy,
"who, like went to an Ivy League school,
"and, like, has money,
and can, like, talk good,"
There's a certain, the sort of texture
of that discomfort is very difficult
to explain if you're not familiar with it.
And there's violence on
the back of that, too.
We're coming off more than a century
of domestic terrorism,
in terms of black people
being afraid about how
being uppity in that way
and being in communities they're not
supposed to be in, asserting power
and agency that they're
not supposed to have,
can literally be a death sentence, right?
And so that texture is
still in the culture,
so that's a long way of saying that
there's one experience that
I was expecting to have,
of just being with guns and people being
uncomfortable around
guns, and I think we both
had that experience and
saw that in different ways
people in Texas find that banal,
people in Texas find that uncomfortable.
But there's a whole other
texture to this experience,
once we'd crossed over
into the white community
which is just watching a group
of middle class white
people be uncomfortable
at black people taking
a power and an agency
that they're not comfortable
with them having.
Does that make sense?
- I think so, yeah.
- And it's a really difficult experience--
- How does that show itself?
How do you become aware of that?
- So I'll give you an
example, which is that,
and I think this is an example I think
we will have different
perspectives on this
in terms of how it showed up on the tape.
Which is, there's that gentleman,
I think he's still in this cut,
who's like, "You know we
didn't use to see that."
(grinding electric guitar)
The guy who's like "We
didn't use to see that
"back in my day."
- Do you know what this is?
- I have no idea.
- I don't know but it makes
you uncomfortable, don't it?
It's not like the America I grew up in
for the last 63 years, I promise you.
- Yeah, no, I definitely tell you that.
We were much more
separated before, for sure.
- Right.
(cymbal roll)
- I made a segregation joke.
Because I'm classy
- Thank you, I would go dick joke there,
it would've been out of place,
it wouldn't have--
- Different strokes
- Yeah, we each have
different strong suits.
He's noticing something,
and to him it's like,
"This is just not how it should be."
- Yeah.
- Which is probably the
most kind reading of that,
is an unconscious bias,
and probably the most
pointed reading is just a conscious bias.
- Yeah, and so a cleaner
example is actually
something we cut, and I don't think
it was a bad decision to
cut this, but there was--
- Thank you.
There were a group of kids,
there were a group of teenagers
who I interviewed on camera and I was like
"Are you comfortable
with the group that you
"just saw go past?"
And they were like "Oh,
yeah, no problem, whatever."
Or no, this is what it
was, they pretended they
didn't see them, so they were like,
I don't know if you remember these guys,
and I was pretty hard
on them in the interview
and I think too, I know there was,
one of our white colleagues was like
"I think you're being too hard on them."
and you know, whatever
whatever in terms of
what showed up on camera but they were
talking about the group when we walked up,
and they were talking
about calling the police
on them when I walked up.
- Oh really, I didn't know that.
- And so I heard that and so I was probing
because I was like
"Motherfuckers, I just heard you,
"I just heard you talking
about calling the police
"on them."
And they're like "Oh, no
man, I didn't even see that."
and this is the sort of
doublespeak that I think
I'm attuned to in a
different way, just because
of my experience with this stuff, right?
And it's an incredibly difficult thing to,
an experience like that
is a bit of a Rorschach,
where it's like in all
the nonverbal behavior
that's coming at me
from people all the time
and it's like there's
all these studies about
how so much communication
is not about language
and what you're literally
saying but just like
the vibe you're sending out.
It's why everybody
thinks we're so charming,
it's not our words it's our energy.
- Thank you.
- But there's the nonverbal
energy I'm getting
from that context is so deeply hostile
and deeply uncomfortable in a way that is
very hard to communicate
to people who aren't
attenuated to hear that
discomfort as danger.
Does that make sense?
Because when I feel that
discomfort in a group
of white people, I'm like "Oh, shit."
I am like "I need to be aware because
"I am in trouble."
Because that level of concern
from a police officer is something
that could kill me, that level of
concern is gonna get
the police called on me,
that level of concern is
gonna get me into a conflict
in my nice middle class
restaurant that I'm in,
you know, and so it's
perhaps a hyper-awareness
to it but that discomfort is a real thing,
and that's very much what we got
when we crossed over into
that white community.
- That totally makes sense.
I guess my thought in that is,
that's also the intended
response, correct?
- Sure, yeah.
- So is that a successful form of protest?
In the fact that you are able to see that,
in the fact that you
have some white people
going to a football game who are like,
"Holy shit, what is this? What is this?"
and then they're forced to
have that conversation then.
Like, no matter what, if I'm going
to a football game and a bunch of people
are coming up with guns,
I'm gonna talk about it.
And then if a camera comes up to me,
I'm probably gonna be like,
"Uh, I wasn't talking about it."
Now, I don't doubt that there is a giant
racial component there, of course,
but I'm wondering, is
that how that situation
is going to play out?
- I think it's as much about, you know,
angry anti-police chants and a bunch of
loud black guys being loud and direct
and confrontational and black
as it is the weapons on their backs.
In terms of whether or
not that's successful,
I think it's a really good question,
and it's an audience question, right?
So there's the one conversation about
it being nourishing to a community
that feels stepped on, and then
there's a conversation about, okay
what are we doing with
this kind of rhetoric?
One of the functions of
this kind of militant
posturing, rhetorically, is to say,
"Okay, well, if you are comfortable
"with this kind of
violence being done to us,
"what do you feel, like come with me on
"the empathetic exercise of imagining
"if this kind of violence came back to you
"and your community."
And the level of discomfort
that white people
feel when they hear somebody like
Rakim talk so cavalierly about the death
of white police officers, that level
of discomfort is the level of discomfort
a mainstream white audience should feel
every single time they hear about
a black person being killed.
And I think the criticism,
the most generous,
sophisticated reading of this vocabulary
of protest is that, okay well,
obviously, nonviolent protests,
Black Lives Matter, all these other modes
of trying to communicate
how fundamentally,
viscerally unjust the situation we're in,
all that's not really
getting the job done,
and so I'm going to try to reflect back
the kind of violence we
are experiencing at you
and see if that shakes anything.
So, to your point, it is designed
to make people, I think, uncomfortable,
and I think the question
is whether or not,
is what we then do with that discomfort.
What does that discomfort mean?
And do I have a similar
level of discomfort
about the injustices
they're complaining about?
- The argument that you make is, I think,
and incredible argument, and I think,
like, what you're asking
for is an engagement
with a white community
that is not engaging
with a community that is under duress,
that is feeling that this kind of stress,
and has felt this kind of violence for
a hundred years, but the articulation
of that in the moment is,
obviously it's the guns
to grab attention.
It is chants, it's chants,
it's "Oink oink, bang bang."
Like, the chants are directed at police
- Yeah, that's about killing police.
- 100 percent.
- That is a chant about killing police.
- So I feel like you
have, there are definitely
people on the right,
there are people who are
very critical of Guerrilla Mainframe
specifically because of their tactics
because of the lines that they cross.
Again, this is the
conversations that we were
having, like, when you are there
and you are seeing that happen,
and you're having that emotional journey
to see how people are reacting to that,
are you frustrated with the means
that they're using to elicit that reaction
or do you find this reaction,
I understand that it's a
reaction out of necessity,
but how comfortable are you with
that form of protest?
- It's difficult to, I have my ambivalence
about it, right?
Like I don't, I have my
ambivalence about it, I think.
But, my sort of first order, before I can
engage with my own personal ambivalence
about it, I have, sort
of first and foremost,
the work of asking other people,
asking white people, effectively,
to engage with it honestly,
and it's one of the frustrations
about working on this piece, honestly,
is that I do have real questions
about this group
specifically, and I do have
real questions about whether or not
this mode of protest moves the needle
in a positive way.
The same questions I had about
the Black Panther Party, and militant
Marcus Garvey groups on
back through the history
of black people.
But again, to me that's sort of
a second-order problem,
because the first-order
problem is asking for meaningful
engagement with the thing that it is.
And I find that, and I
found working on this piece
that the discomfort that is produced
by the rhetoric is so loud that it
shuts white people down.
- But is the actions,
are they disqualifying?
- In what sense?
- Well, I think--
- It's language, no, it's language,
you know what I mean?
- But at some point somebody shuts off,
and we're aware of when you push something
so somebody shuts off,
and I think the reticence
that you have if people
hear "Oink oink, bang bang."
If you hear something
online that is making fun
of police officers who are
dead and their families,
and you challenged Rakim on that.
Is that a line that is
crossed at which point
you are not going to be heard because
you have crossed that now delegitimizes
the argument that you have?
- It's a larger conversation about decorum
in politics, about decorum, you know,
and propriety, and there are communities
that feel like they don't have the luxury
of being polite because they're dying.
I do have concerns, I often
wish groups like this,
and I very much include
the Black Panther Party
in this, were more
thoughtful and deliberate
about how this kind of
confrontational messaging
can be useful and can
be counterproductive.
Like, I almost always
want groups like this
to be a little more sophisticated
with how they wield the powerful tools
that they're wielding.
But again that's like,
that's let's shut the door
and have that conversation separately.
Because to me that's an abdication
of responsibility as
a mainstream audience,
and it's an abdication of responsibility
as white listeners to say,
"Okay, well you haven't
packaged this for me
"in a way that makes me comfortable,
"therefore, I have permission to keep
"shutting the door on this."
It's a less conservative version
of the conversation about
Kaepernick and kneeling
which is like "Oh, I get
that police brutality
"is is a thing you wanna talk about,
"but the way you're doing it,
"the nature of this protest turns me off
"so I'm not going to
engage with the substance
"of your criticism because the manner
"of your speech is shutting me down."
It's a similar criticism, right?
- But I would say, I remember watching
your interview with Rakim and,
I think we even watched this together,
and I think, like,
- I remember this I remember very clearly.
- You ask him about his Facebook posts,
and you say, like "These police officers
"were killed in Dallas, and you said LMAO
"smiley face."
And Rakim was like "Oh,
yeah, I laughed, I laughed."
Rakim owned it.
(grinding electric guitar)
And he was joyous at a few moments,
and for me, I'm like "Fuck this guy."
- Do you stand by those statements?
- I didn't say those
officers as individuals
deserved what they got,
I said the police
department deserved that.
- So, just to be clear, I'm pretty sure
the exact quote was "They
deserve what they got."
and I think it was, "LMAO" afterwards.
- Yes, and I was laughing, and I'm still
laughing today, just like
they're laughing at me, right?
Because as a black person what you hear
is Trayvon Martin, is
Michael Brown, Tamir Rice.
Eventually at some point
it become frustrating.
- How can you, then,
turn around and celebrate
other people, going through the pain
of losing people that they love?
- Just like America celebrated Hiroshima
and Nagasaki, after
Pearl Harbor, you know.
It's just, you guys get
to grieve, for a change.
- Do you have any intention
of doing something
like what he did?
- No.
Killing police officers is not gonna stop
police brutality, if anything
it's gonna encourage it.
You know--
- But couldn't you say the same thing
about your statements, though?
- I wanna be provocative
enough to get their attention.
- Okay.
(cymbal roll)
- I was like, "This
negates everything he did
"up until this point."
And also I'm like, "I
feel weird about putting
"this guy on television because of that
"aggressive stance."
Also I feel protective, because I do think
I agree with the things that you're saying
in the attention that they're bringing,
but I'm like, "This is delegitimizing
"all the stuff he did before."
Like, in order to try to amplify
the actual story, which,
at that point, to me
felt like drawing attention
to police violence
against African-American communities,
specifically in Texas, it's like
you have a guy who's laughing about
cops getting killed, and like,
guess what the stories gonna be,
the stories gonna be
the guy who's laughing
at cops getting killed.
We want it to be about something else,
we can't amplify that part of that story.
- It's interesting, and I appreciate
your bringing up that, you
watching it for the first time,
because I was really struck by that,
that was a striking
moment just in the process
of making that for me because I've never
seen you react so
negatively to an interview
subject before.
My experience of it was
that you were really
quite reviled by that and
really quite disgusted
by that in a way that
I think is, is, that's
your personal reaction
and is very appropriate
in that respect.
But I remember being
very surprised by that
because I don't have,
I challenge him on it
in the interview.
I find those statements
at the very least clumsy,
and at the very most, immoral.
But they don't elicit the
same real repulsion for me,
and I do think that is
a racialized difference,
because there is, and this is not
a you personally thing, this is just
the fucking culture.
Black people are scary in this culture,
and I think that part of why that reaction
for not just you, for a couple other
of the white writers on the show
had such a negative reaction to that
was because of the racial coding
of that language coming out of the mouth
of a black guy.
And the situation that pivots me into
is not being able to engage with my own
ambivalence about it because it's like,
oh shit, I get that reaction,
and then I also get why
that kind of language
is totally banal and just an NWA album.
There's a long history in pop culture
of, like, people saying that kind of stuff
where it's just a kind
of rhetorical posturing.
- Sure.
- From a community that's just like,
beat up by the cops, and is just like
"Well, not fuck you, fuck you!"
There's something
pedestrian about it as well.
And the fact that it
reads as really dangerous
and reads as really disquieting
and raises a real earnest engagement
and endorsement of that kind of violence,
I do think is racialized.
And I don't think it's about the skill
of us as storytellers to tell that story
but I think it's about,
and I think this is
a really difficult thing, it's a more
difficult thing for you,
that me in some ways,
but to engage honestly
with that discomfort,
and to tell the story of that discomfort
which is your honest reaction to it,
while also telling the story of some of my
experience of it, which
is where the discomfort
is not the headline, the
discomfort of that language
and that kind of violent rhetoric is not
the headline, the discomfort is "Look what
"this particular group's organic response
"to the other violence
they're suffering is."
And the most elite version of this story
is being able to tell
both of those experiences
at the same time.
And it's super hard, it's super hard.
- I think what was interesting too
in putting this together, functionally,
the way you make television is you have
these stories and you
have to edit them down
and you pick the things that represent
the experience that you had, and you
put them in an order, and we got into
an interesting conversation
and debate about
if we're representing them correctly.
And I think this got down, it got into the
minutiae, it got into the music choices
we were using to address them--
- Underscoring what we're using.
- How we underscore them, like--
- What order do we introduce them in?
- Right.
- Like whether or not we can show C.J.
Riding on a bike and being playful,
whether or not, you know, like,
we had a bunch of discussions.
- And I'll admit, honestly,
we had four writers,
you're the only black writer.
- I was aware.
- You're aware, but I think like,
I probably wasn't.
I think that is unfair, as somebody
who's like, you're also an actor in this,
you wear many hats, you're doing
a lot of things there.
You've written on all these episodes,
on the one you're in, and all of that,
but you're also representing
the only voice in the room
who sees it from that perspective.
And I do think, like,
I saw my own ignorance
in that discussion, but I do think
it's an important conversation to have
and it's one that I don't know if
I would have had without being challenged.
- I appreciate, because we had
some tense discussions about this
at different points, you
know, and I appreciate
you were really receptive
to my perspective on it
but the thing that's difficult,
and I've said this in different ways
even in this conversation,
but the situation
it puts me in is, I don't have the luxury
of my own ambivalence, because I end up
fighting for the sort of most favorable
view of these subjects and these groups
because it's underrepresented in the room.
And it's what it is, that's the role
I ended up taking on this
particular conversation.
It's tricky, it's a tricky situation
to be in.
That's what it was.
- That's what it was.
(laughing)
Kobi, I love talking to
you about this stuff,
and I feel like this was really
a learning experience.
This was a tough episode to work on.
I really respect what you
do and what you bring to it.
(upbeat guitar music)
Thank you for trying to keep me honest.
- Jordan, thanks so much
for coming on my podcast
(Jordan laughing)
Oh shit, you're supposed to--
- Oh shit, yeah. (laughs)
- I'm sorry.
- I just got into it.
- If you liked listening to this podcast,
you're gonna like watching it even more.
Go check out Klepper, it's
on all of your devices
including your television.
Go check it out.
Thank you for listening.